
The Skulduggery Pleasant series
SKULDUGGERY PLEASANT
PLAYING WITH FIRE
THE FACELESS ONES
DARK DAYS
MORTAL COIL
DEATH BRINGER
KINGDOM OF THE WICKED
LAST STAND OF DEAD MEN
THE DYING OF THE LIGHT
RESURRECTION
THE MALEFICENT SEVEN
ARMAGEDDON OUTTA HERE
(a Skulduggery Pleasant short-story collection)
The Demon Road trilogy
DEMON ROAD
DESOLATION
AMERICAN MONSTERS

First published in Great Britain by
HarperCollins Children’s Books in 2007
First published in this edition in the
United States of America by HarperCollins Children’s Books in 2018
HarperCollins Children’s Books is a division of HarperCollinsPublishers Ltd,
HarperCollins Publishers
1 London Bridge Street
London SE1 9GF
The HarperCollins website address is:
www.harpercollins.co.uk
Skulduggery Pleasant rests his weary bones on the web at:
www.skulduggerypleasant.com
Derek Landy blogs under duress at
www.dereklandy.blogspot.com
1
Text copyright © Derek Landy 2007
Illuminated letters copyright © Tom Percival 2006
Skulduggery Pleasant™ Derek Landy
Skulduggery Pleasant logo™ HarperCollins Publishers
All rights reserved.
ISBN 978–0–00–824878–9
Derek Landy asserts the moral right to be identified as the author of the work.
Printed and bound in the United States of America by LSC Communications
Conditions of Sale
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade
or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated without the
publisher’s prior consent in any form, binding or cover other than that in
which it is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
Find out more about HarperCollins and the environment at
www.harpercollins.co.uk/green
This book is dedicated to my parents, John and Barbara.
Dad – this is for your bizarrely unwavering support and
unflinching faith.
Barbs – this is for that look on your face when I told you
the good news.
I owe you absolutely everything and, y’know, I suppose it’s
entirely possible that I feel some, like, degree of affection
towards the two of you...
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 9
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 10
1
STEPHANIE
ordon Edgley’s sudden death came as a shock
to everyone – not least himself. One moment
he was in his study, seven words into the
twenty-fifth sentence of the final chapter of his new book And
The Darkness Rained Upon Them, and the next he was dead. A tragic
loss, his mind echoed numbly as he slipped away.
The funeral was attended by family and acquaintances but
not many friends. Gordon hadn’t been a well-liked figure in the
publishing world, for although the books he wrote – tales of
horror and magic and wonder – regularly reared their heads in
11
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 11
the bestseller lists, he had the disquieting habit of insulting
people without realising it, then laughing at their shock. It was
at Gordon’s funeral, however, that Stephanie Edgley first caught
sight of the gentleman in the tan overcoat.
He was standing under the shade of a large tree, away from
the crowd, the coat buttoned up all the way despite the warmth
of the afternoon. A scarf was wrapped around the lower half of
his face and even from her position on the far side of the grave,
Stephanie could make out the wild and frizzy hair that escaped
from the wide brimmed hat he wore low over his gigantic
sunglasses. She watched him, intrigued by his appearance. And
then, like he knew he was being observed, he turned and walked
back through the rows of headstones, and disappeared from
sight.
After the service, Stephanie and her parents travelled back
to her dead uncle’s house, over a humpbacked bridge and along
a narrow road that carved its way through thick woodland. The
gates were heavy and grand and stood open, welcoming them
into the estate. The grounds were vast and the old house itself
was ridiculously big.
There was an extra door in the living room, a door disguised
as a bookcase, and when she was younger Stephanie liked to
think that no one else knew about this door, not even Gordon
12
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 12
himself. It was a secret passageway, like in the stories she’d read,
and she’d make up adventures about haunted houses and
smuggled treasure. This secret passageway would always be her
escape route, and the imaginary villains in these adventures
would be dumbfounded by her sudden and mysterious
disappearance. But now this door, this secret passageway, stood
open, and there was a steady stream of people through it, and
she was saddened that this little piece of magic had been taken
from her.
Tea was served and drinks were poured and little sandwiches
were passed around on silver trays, and Stephanie watched the
mourners casually appraise their surroundings. The major topic
of hushed conversation was the will. Gordon wasn’t a man who
inspired, or even demonstrated, any great affection, so no one
could predict who would inherit his substantial fortune.
Stephanie could see the greed seep into the watery eyes of her
father’s other brother, a horrible little man called Fergus, as he
nodded sadly and spoke sombrely and pocketed the silverware
when he thought no one was looking.
Fergus’s wife was a thoroughly dislikeable, sharp-featured
woman named Beryl. She drifted through the crowd, deep in
unconvincing grief, prying for gossip and digging for scandal.
Her daughters did their best to ignore Stephanie. Carol and
13
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 13
Crystal were twins, fifteen years old, and as sour and vindictive
as their parents. Whereas Stephanie was dark-haired, tall, slim
and strong, they were bottle-blonde, stumpy and dressed in
clothes that made them bulge in all the wrong places. Apart
from their brown eyes, no one would guess that the twins were
related to her. She liked that. It was the only thing about them
she liked. She left them to their petty glares and snide whispers,
and went for a walk.
The corridors of her uncle’s house were long and lined with
paintings. The floor beneath Stephanie’s feet was wooden,
polished to a gleam, and the house smelled of age. Not musty
exactly but... experienced. These walls and these floors had seen
a lot in their time, and Stephanie was nothing but a faint whisper
to them. Here one instant, gone the next.
Gordon had been a good uncle. Arrogant and irresponsible,
yes, but also childish and enormous fun, with a light in his eyes,
a glint of mischief. When everyone else was taking him seriously,
Stephanie was privy to the winks and the nods and the halfsmiles that he would shoot her way when they weren’t looking.
Even as a child she felt she understood him better than most.
She liked his intelligence and his wit, and the way he didn’t care
what people thought of him. He’d been a good uncle to have.
He’d taught her a lot.
14
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 14
She knew that her mother and Gordon had briefly dated
(“courted”, her mother had called it), but when Gordon had
introduced her to his younger brother, it was love at first sight.
Gordon liked to grumble that he had never got more than a
peck on the cheek, but he had stepped aside graciously, and had
quite happily gone on to have numerous torrid affairs with
numerous beautiful women. He used to say that it had almost
been a fair trade, but that he suspected he had lost out.
Stephanie climbed the staircase, pushed open the door to
Gordon’s study and stepped inside. The walls were filled with
the framed covers from his bestsellers and shared space with all
manner of awards. One entire wall was made up of shelves,
jammed with books. There were biographies and historical
novels and science texts and psychology tomes, and there were
battered little paperbacks stuck in between. A lower shelf had
magazines, literary reviews and quarterlies.
Stephanie passed the shelves which housed the first editions
of Gordon’s novels and approached the desk. She looked at the
chair where he’d died, trying to imagine him there, how he must
have slumped. And then, a voice so smooth it could have been
made of velvet:
“At least he died doing what he loved.”
She turned, surprised, to see the man from the funeral in the
15
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 15
overcoat and hat standing in the doorway. The scarf was still
wrapped, the sunglasses still on, the fuzzy hair still poking out.
His hands were gloved.
“Yes,” Stephanie said, because she couldn’t think of
anything else to say. “At least there’s that.”
“You’re one of his nieces then?” the man asked. “You’re not
stealing anything, you’re not breaking anything, so I’d guess
you’re Stephanie.” She nodded and took the opportunity to look
at him more closely. She couldn’t see even the tiniest bit of his
face beneath the scarf and sunglasses.
“Were you a friend of his?” she asked. He was tall, this man,
tall and thin, though his coat made it difficult to judge.
“I was,” he answered with a move of his head. This slight
movement made her realise that the rest of his body was
unnaturally still. “I’ve known him for years, met him outside a
bar in New York when I was over there, back when he had just
published his first novel.”
Stephanie couldn’t see anything behind the sunglasses – they
were black as pitch. “Are you a writer too?”
“Me? No, I wouldn’t know where to start. But I got to live
out my writer fantasies through Gordon.”
“You had writer fantasies?”
“Doesn’t everyone?”
16
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 16
“I don’t know. I don’t think so.”
“Oh. Then that would make me seem kind of odd, wouldn’t
it?”
“Well,” Stephanie answered. “It would help.”
“Gordon used to talk about you all the time, boast about his
little niece. He was an individual of character, your uncle. It
seems that you are too.”
“You say that like you know me.”
“Strong-willed, intelligent, sharp-tongued, doesn’t suffer
fools gladly... remind you of anyone?”
“Yes. Gordon.”
“Interesting,” said the man. “Because those are the exact
words he used to describe you.” His gloved fingers dipped into
his waistcoat and brought out an ornate pocket watch on a
delicate gold chain.
“Good luck in whatever you decide to do with your life.”
“Thank you,” Stephanie said, a little dumbly. “You too.”
She felt the man smile, though she could see no mouth, and
he turned from the doorway and left her there. Stephanie found
she couldn’t take her eyes off where he had been. Who was he?
She hadn’t even got his name.
She crossed over to the door and stepped out, wondering
how he had vanished from sight so quickly. She hurried down
17
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 17
the stairs and reached the large hall without seeing him. She
opened the front door just as a big black car turned out on to the
road. She watched him drive away, stayed there for a few
moments, then reluctantly rejoined her extended family in the
living room, just in time to see Fergus slip a silver ashtray into his
breast pocket.
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 18
2
THE WILL
ife in the Edgley household was fairly uneventful.
Stephanie’s mother worked in a bank and her
father owned a construction company, and she
had no brothers or sisters, so the routine they had settled into
was one of amiable convenience. But even so, there was always
the voice in the back of her mind telling her that there should
be more to her life than this, more to her life than the small
coastal town of Haggard. She just couldn’t figure out what that
something was.
Her first year of secondary school had just come to a close
19
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 19
and she was looking forward to the summer break. Stephanie
didn’t like school. She found it difficult to get along with her
classmates – not because they weren’t nice people, but simply
because she had nothing in common with them. And she didn’t
like teachers. She didn’t like the way they demanded respect
they hadn’t earned. Stephanie had no problem doing what she
was told, just so long as she was given a good reason why she
should.
She had spent the first few days of the summer helping out
her father, answering phones and sorting through the files in his
office. Gladys, his secretary of seven years, had decided she’d
had enough of the construction business and wanted to try her
hand as a performance artist. Stephanie found it vaguely
discomfiting whenever she passed her on the street, this fortythree-year-old woman doing a modern dance interpretation of
Faust. Gladys had made herself a costume to go with the act, a
costume, she said, that symbolised the internal struggle Faust
was going through, and apparently she refused to be seen in
public without it. Stephanie did her best to avoid catching
Gladys’s eye.
If Stephanie wasn’t helping out in the office, she was either
down at the beach, swimming, or locked in her room listening to
music. She was in her room, trying to find the charger for her
20
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 20
mobile phone, when her mother knocked on the door and
stepped in. She was still dressed in the sombre clothes she had
worn to the funeral, though Stephanie had tied back her long
dark hair and changed into her usual jeans and trainers within
two minutes of returning to the house.
“We got a call from Gordon’s solicitor,” her mother said,
sounding a little surprised. “They want us at the reading of the
will.”
“Oh,” Stephanie responded. “What do you think he left
you?”
“Well, we’ll find out tomorrow. You too, because you’re
coming with us.”
“I am?” Stephanie said with a slight frown.
“Your name’s on the list, that’s all I know. We’re leaving at
ten, OK?”
“I’m supposed to be helping Dad in the morning.”
“He called Gladys, asked her to fill in for a few hours, as a
favour. She said yes, as long as she could wear the peanut suit.”
They left for the solicitor’s at a quarter past ten the next
morning, fifteen minutes later than planned thanks to
Stephanie’s father’s casual disregard for punctuality. He ambled
through the house, looking like there was something he’d
forgotten and he was just waiting for it to occur to him again. He
21
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 21
nodded and smiled whenever his wife told him to hurry up, said
“Yes, absolutely,” and just before he was due to join them in the
car, he meandered off again, looking around with a dazed
expression.
“He does this on purpose,” Stephanie’s mother said as they
sat in the car, seatbelts on and ready to go. They watched him
appear at the front door, shrug into his jacket, tuck in his shirt,
go to step out, and then pause.
“He looks like he’s about to sneeze,” Stephanie remarked.
“No,” her mother responded, “he’s just thinking.” She stuck
her head out of the window. “Desmond, what’s wrong now?”
He looked up, puzzled. “I think I’m forgetting something.”
Stephanie leaned forward in the back seat, took a look at
him and spoke to her mother, who nodded and stuck her head
out again. “Where are your shoes, dear?”
He looked down at his socks – one brown, one navy – and
his clouded expression cleared. He gave them the thumbs-up
and disappeared from view.
“That man,” her mother said, shaking her head. “Did you
know he once lost a shopping centre?”
“He what?”
“I never told you that? It was the first big contract he got.
His company did a wonderful job and he was driving his clients
22
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 22
to see it, and he forgot where he put it. He drove around for
almost an hour until he saw something he recognised. He may
be a very talented engineer, but I swear, he’s got the attention
span of a goldfish. So unlike Gordon.”
“They weren’t very alike, were they?”
Her mother smiled. “It wasn’t always that way. They used to
do everything together. The three of them were inseparable.”
“What, even Fergus?”
“Even Fergus. But when your grandmother died they all
drifted apart. Gordon started mixing with a strange crowd after
that.”
“Strange in what way?”
“Ah, they probably just appeared strange to us,” her mother
said with a small laugh. “Your dad was getting started in the
construction business and I was in college and we were what you
might call normal. Gordon resisted being normal, and his
friends, they kind of scared us. We never knew what they were
into, but we knew it wasn’t anything...”
“Normal.”
“Exactly. They scared your dad most of all though.”
“Why?”
Stephanie’s father walked out of the house, shoes on, and
closed the front door after him.
23
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 23
“I think he was more like Gordon than he liked to let on,”
her mother said quietly, and then her dad got into the car.
“OK,” he said proudly. “I’m ready.”
They looked at him as he nodded, chuffed with himself. He
strapped on his seatbelt and turned the key. The engine purred
to life. Stephanie waved to Jasper, an eight-year-old boy with
unfortunate ears, as her dad backed out on to the road, put the
car in gear and they were off, narrowly missing their wheelie bin
as they went.
The drive to the solicitor’s office in the city took a little under
an hour and they arrived twenty minutes late. They were led up
a flight of creaky stairs to a small office, too warm to be
comfortable, with a large window that offered a wonderful view
of the brick wall across the street. Fergus and Beryl were there,
and they showed their displeasure at having been kept waiting
by looking at their watches and scowling. Stephanie’s parents
took the remaining chairs and Stephanie stood behind them as
the solicitor peered at them through cracked spectacles.
“Now can we get started?” Beryl snapped.
The solicitor, a short man named Mr Fedgewick, with the
girth and appearance of a sweaty bowling ball, tried smiling.
“We still have one more person to wait on,” he said and Fergus’s
eyes bulged.
24
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 24
“Who?” he demanded. “There can’t be anyone else, we are
the only siblings Gordon had. Who is it? It’s not some charity, is
it? I’ve never trusted charities. They always want something
from you.”
“It’s, it’s not a charity,” Mr Fedgewick said. “He did say,
however, that he might be a little late.”
“Who said?” Stephanie’s father asked, and the solicitor
looked down at the file open before him.
“A most unusual name, this,” he said. “It seems we are
waiting on one Mr Skulduggery Pleasant.”
“Well who on earth is that?” asked Beryl, irritated. “He
sounds like a, he sounds like a... Fergus, what does he sound like?”
“He sounds like a weirdo,” Fergus said, glaring at Fedgewick.
“He’s not a weirdo, is he?”
“I really couldn’t say,” Fedgewick answered, his paltry excuse
for a smile failing miserably under the glares he was getting from
Fergus and Beryl. “But I’m sure he’ll be along soon.”
Fergus frowned, narrowing his beady eyes as much as was
possible. “How are you sure?”
Fedgewick faltered, unable to offer a reason, and then the
door opened and the man in the tan overcoat entered the room.
“Sorry I’m late,” he said, closing the door behind him. “It
was unavoidable I’m afraid.”
25
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 25
Everyone in the room stared at him, stared at the scarf and
the gloves and the sunglasses and the wild fuzzy hair. It was a
glorious day outside, certainly not the kind of weather to be
wrapped up like this. Stephanie looked closer at the hair. From
this distance, it didn’t even seem real.
The solicitor cleared his throat. “Um, you are Skulduggery
Pleasant?”
“At your service,” the man said. Stephanie could listen to
that voice all day. Her mother, uncertain as she was, had smiled
her greetings, but her father was looking at him with an
expression of wariness she had never seen on his face before.
After a moment the expression left him and he nodded politely
and looked back to Mr Fedgewick. Fergus and Beryl were still
staring.
“Do you have something wrong with your face?” Beryl
asked.
Fedgewick cleared his throat again. “OK then, let’s get down
to business, now that we’re all here. Excellent. Good. This, of
course, being the last will and testament of Gordon Edgley,
revised last almost one year ago. Gordon has been a client of
mine for the past twenty years, and in that time, I got to know
him well, so let me pass on to you, his family and, and friend, my
deepest, deepest—”
26
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 26
“Yes yes yes,” Fergus interrupted, waving his hand in the air.
“Can we just skip this part? We’re already running behind
schedule. Let’s go to the part where we get stuff. Who gets the
house? And who gets the villa?”
“Who gets the fortune?” Beryl asked, leaning forward in her
seat.
“The royalties,” Fergus said. “Who gets the royalties from
the books?”
Stephanie glanced at Skulduggery Pleasant from the corner
of her eye. He was standing back against the wall, hands in his
pockets, looking at the solicitor. Well, he seemed to be looking at
the solicitor; with those sunglasses he could have been looking
anywhere. She returned her gaze to Fedgewick as he picked up
a page from his desk and read from it.
“‘To my brother Fergus and his beautiful wife Beryl,’” he
read, and Stephanie did her best to hide a grin, ‘“I leave my car,
and my boat, and a gift.’”
Fergus and Beryl blinked. “His car?” Fergus said. “His boat?
Why would he leave me his boat?”
“You hate the water,” Beryl said, anger rising in her voice.
“You get seasick.”
“I do get seasick,” Fergus snapped, “and he knew that!”
“And we already have a car,” Beryl said.
27
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 27
“And we already have a car!” Fergus repeated.
Beryl was sitting so far up on her chair that she was almost
on the desk. “This gift,” she said, her voice low and threatening,
“is it the fortune?”
Mr Fedgewick coughed nervously, and took a small box from
his desk drawer and slid it towards them. They looked at this
box. They looked some more. They both reached for it at the
same time, and Stephanie watched them slap at each other’s
hands until Beryl snatched it off the desk and tore the lid open.
“What is it?” Fergus asked in a small voice. “Is it a key to a
safety deposit box? Is it, is it an account number? Is it, what is it?
Wife, what is it?”
All colour had drained from Beryl’s face and her hands were
shaking. She blinked hard to keep the tears away, then she
turned the box for everyone to see, and everyone saw the
brooch, about the size of a drinks coaster, nestled in the plush
cushion. Fergus stared at it.
“It doesn’t even have any jewels on it,” Beryl said, her voice
strangled. Fergus opened his mouth wide like a startled fish and
turned to Fedgewick.
“What else do we get?” he asked, panicking.
Mr Fedgewick tried another smile. “Your, uh, your brother’s
love?”
28
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 28
Stephanie heard a high-pitched whine, and it took her a
moment to realise it was coming from Beryl. Fedgewick
returned his attention to the will, trying to ignore the horrified
looks he was getting from Fergus and his wife.
“‘To my good friend and guide Skulduggery Pleasant I
leave the following advice. Your path is your own, and I have
no wish to sway you, but sometimes the greatest enemy we
can face is ourselves, and the greatest battle is against the
darkness within. There is a storm coming, and sometimes the
key to safe harbour is hidden from us, and sometimes it is
right before our eyes.’”
Stephanie joined in with everyone else as they stared at
Mr Pleasant. She had known there was something different
about him, she had known it the first moment she saw him –
there was something exotic, something mysterious, something
dangerous. For his part, his head dipped lower and that was the
only reaction he gave. He offered no explanations as to what
Gordon’s message had meant.
Fergus patted his wife’s knee. “See, Beryl? A car, a boat, a
brooch, it’s not that bad. He could have given us some stupid
advice.”
“Oh, shut up, would you?” Beryl snarled and Fergus recoiled
in his chair.
29
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 29
Mr Fedgewick read on. “‘To my other brother, Desmond,
the lucky one of the family, I leave to you your wife. I think you
might like her.’” Stephanie saw her parents clasp each other’s
hands and smile sadly. “‘So now that you’ve successfully stolen
my girlfriend, maybe you’d like to take her to my villa in France,
which I am also leaving to you.’”
“They get the villa?” Beryl cried, jumping to her feet.
“Beryl,” Fergus said, “please...”
“Do you know how much that villa is worth?” Beryl
continued, looking like she might lunge at Stephanie’s parents.
“We get a brooch – they get a villa? There are only three of
them! We’ve got Carol and Crystal! We have more! We could do
with the extra space! Why do they deserve the villa?” She thrust
the box towards them. “Swap!”
“Mrs Edgley, please retake your seat or we shall be unable to
continue,” Mr Fedgewick said, and eventually, after much bugeyed glaring, Beryl sat down.
“Thank you,” Fedgewick said, looking like he had had quite
enough excitement for one day. He licked his lips, adjusted his
glasses, and peered again at the will. “‘If there is one regret that
I have had in my life, it is that I have never fathered any children.
There are times when I look at what Fergus and Beryl have
produced and I consider myself fortunate, but there are also
30
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 30
times when it breaks my heart. And so, finally, to my niece
Stephanie.’”
Stephanie’s eyes widened. What? She was getting something?
Leaving the villa to her parents wasn’t enough for Gordon?
Fedgewick continued reading. “‘The world is bigger than
you know and scarier than you might imagine. The only
currency worth anything is being true to yourself, and the only
goal worth seeking is finding out who you truly are.’”
She could feel Fergus and Beryl glaring at her and she did
her best to ignore them.
“‘Make your parents proud, and make them glad to have
you living under their roof, because I leave to you my property
and possessions, my assets and my royalties, to be inherited on
the day you turn eighteen. I’d just like to take this opportunity to
say that, in my own way, I love you all, even those I don’t
particularly like. That’s you, Beryl.’”
Fedgewick took off his spectacles and looked up.
Stephanie became aware that everyone was staring at
her and she hadn’t a clue what she was supposed to say.
Fergus was again doing his startled fish impression and
Beryl was pointing one long bony finger at her, trying to
speak but failing. Her parents were looking at her in
stunned surprise. Only Skulduggery Pleasant moved, walking
31
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 31
behind her and gently touching her arm.
“Congratulations,” he said and moved on towards the door.
As soon as it clicked shut behind him, Beryl found her voice.
“HER?” she screamed. “HER?”
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:14 Page 32
3
LITTLE GIRL, ALL ALONE
hat afternoon Stephanie and her mother
took the fifteen-minute drive from Haggard
to Gordon’s estate. Her mum opened the
front door and stepped back.
“Owner of the house goes first,” she said with a little smile
and a bow, and Stephanie stepped inside. She wasn’t thinking
of this house as her property – the idea was too big, too silly.
Even if her parents were, technically, the custodians until she
turned eighteen, how could she own a house? How many other
twelve-year-old kids owned houses?
33
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 33
No, it was too silly an idea. Too far-fetched. Too crazy.
Exactly the kind of thing that Gordon would have thought
made perfect sense.
The house was big and quiet and empty as they walked
through it. Everything seemed new to her now, and Stephanie
found herself reacting differently to the furniture and carpets
and paintings. Did she like it? Did she agree with this colour or
that fabric? One thing that had to be said for Gordon, he had a
good eye. Stephanie’s mother said there was very little she would
change if she had to. Some of the paintings were a little too
unnerving for her taste maybe, but on the whole the furnishings
were elegant and understated, exuding an air of distinction that
befitted a house of this stature.
They hadn’t decided what they were going to do with the
house. Any decision was left up to Stephanie, but her parents still
had the villa to consider. Owning three houses between them
seemed a bit much. Her father had suggested selling the villa but
her mother hated the thought of letting go of a place so idyllic.
They had also talked about Stephanie’s education, and she
knew that conversation was far from over. The moment they had
left Mr Fedgewick’s office they warned her not to let all this go
to her head. Recent events, they had said, should not mean she
could stop studying, stop planning for college. She needed to be
34
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 34
independent, they said, she needed to make it on her own.
Stephanie had let them talk, and nodded occasionally and
muttered an agreement where an agreement was appropriate.
She didn’t bother to explain that she needed college, she needed
to find her own way in the world because she knew that if she
didn’t, she’d never escape Haggard. She wasn’t about to throw
her future away simply because she had come into some money.
She and her mother spent so long looking around the
ground floor that by the time they got to the bottom of the stairs,
it was already five o’clock. With their exploring done for the day,
they locked up and walked to the car. The first few drops of rain
splattered against the windscreen as they got in. Stephanie
clicked her seatbelt closed and her mother turned the key in the
ignition.
The car spluttered a bit, groaned a little and then shut up
altogether. Stephanie’s mother looked at her.
“Uh oh.” They both got out and opened the bonnet.
“Well,” her mother said, looking at the engine, “at least
that’s still there.”
“Do you know anything about engines?” Stephanie asked.
“That’s why I have a husband, so I don’t have to. Engines
and shelves, that’s why man was invented.” Stephanie made a
mental note to learn about engines before she turned eighteen.
35
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 35
She wasn’t too fussed about the shelves.
Her mum dug her mobile phone out of her bag and called
Stephanie’s dad, but he was busy on site and there was no way
he could get to them before nightfall. They went back inside the
house and her mother called a mechanic, and they spent three
quarters of an hour waiting for him to arrive.
The sky was grey and angry and the rain was falling hard by
the time the truck appeared around the corner. It splashed
through puddles on its way up the long drive, and Stephanie’s
mum pulled her jacket over her head and ran out to meet it.
Stephanie could see a great big dog in the cab of the truck,
looking on as the mechanic got out to examine their car. After a
few minutes, her mother ran back inside, thoroughly drenched.
“He can’t fix it here,” she said, wringing out her jacket on
the porch, “so he’s going to tow it to the garage. It shouldn’t take
too long to fix.”
“Will there be room for both of us in the truck?”
“You can sit on my knee.”
“Mum!”
“Or I can sit on your knee, whatever works.”
“Can I stay here?”
Her mother looked at her. “On your own?”
“Please? You just said it won’t take long, and I’d like to have
36
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 36
another look around, just on my own.”
“I don’t know, Steph...”
“Please? I’ve stayed on my own before. I won’t break
anything, I swear.”
Her mother laughed. “OK fine. I shouldn’t be any more
than an hour, all right? An hour and a half at the most.” Her
mother gave her a quick kiss on the cheek. “Call me if you need
anything.”
She ran back outside and jumped in the cab next to the dog,
who proceeded to slobber all over her face. Stephanie watched
their car being towed off into the distance and then it vanished
from sight.
She did a little more exploring, now that she was on her
own. She climbed the stairs and went straight to Gordon’s study.
His publisher, Seamus T. Steepe of Arc Light Books, had
phoned them earlier that day, passing on his condolences and
enquiring about the state of Gordon’s last book. Her mother
had told him that they’d find out if Gordon had completed it,
and if he had, they’d send it on. Mr Steepe was very keen to get
the book on the shelves, certain that it would crash on to the
bestseller list and stay there for a long time. “Dead writers sell,”
he had said, like he approved of Gordon’s clever marketing ploy.
Stephanie opened the desk drawer and found the
37
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 37
manuscript in a neat stack. She pulled it out carefully and laid it
on the desktop, careful not to smudge the paper. The first page
held the title, nothing more, in bold lettering:
And The Darkness Rained Upon Them.
The manuscript was thick and heavy, like all of Gordon’s
books. She’d read most of them, and the odd splash of
pretension aside, had quite enjoyed his work. His stories tended
to be about people who could do astonishing and wonderful
things, and the strange and terrible events that invariably led up
to their bizarre and horrible deaths. She noticed the way he
would set up a strong and noble hero, and over the course of the
book systematically subject this hero to brutal punishment in a
bid to strip away all his arrogance and certainty so that by the
end he was humbled and had learned a great lesson. And then
Gordon killed him off, usually in the most undignified way
possible. Stephanie could almost hear Gordon laughing with
mischievous glee as she’d read.
She lifted the title page and carefully laid it face down on the
desk beside the manuscript. She started reading. She didn’t
mean to spend long at it, but soon she was devouring every
word, oblivious to the creaking old house and the rain outside.
38
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 38
Her mobile phone rang, making her jump. She had been
reading for two hours. She pressed the answer button and held
it to her ear.
“Hi, sweetie,” came her mother’s voice, “everything OK?”
“Yes,” Stephanie answered. “Just reading.”
“You’re not reading one of Gordon’s books, are you? Steph,
he writes about horrible monsters and scary stuff and bad
people doing worse things. It’ll give you nightmares.”
“No, Mum, I’m... I’m reading the dictionary.”
Even the brief silence from the other end of the phone was
sceptical. “The dictionary?” her mother said. “Really?”
“Yeah,” Stephanie said. “Did you know that popple is a
word?”
“You are stranger than your father, you know that?”
“I suspected as much... So is the car fixed yet?”
“No, and that’s why I’m calling. They can’t get it going and
the road up to you is flooded. I’m going to get a taxi up as far as
it’ll go and then I’ll see if I can find some way around on foot.
It’s going to be another two hours at least.”
Stephanie sensed an opportunity. Ever since she was a
child she had much preferred her own company to the
company of others, and it occurred to her that she had never
spent a whole night without her parents nearby. A small
39
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 39
taste of freedom and it almost tingled on her tongue.
“Mum, it’s fine, you don’t have to. I’m OK here.”
“There’s no way I’m leaving you in a strange house by
yourself.”
“It’s not a strange house; it’s Gordon’s and it’s fine. There’s
no point in you trying to get here tonight – it’s lashing rain.”
“Sweetie, it won’t take me long.”
“It’ll take you ages. Where’s it flooded?”
Her mother paused. “At the bridge.”
“The bridge? And you want to walk from the bridge to
here?”
“If I speed-walk—”
“Mum, don’t be silly. Get Dad to pick you up.”
“Sweetheart, are you sure?”
“I like it here, really. OK?”
“Well, OK,” her mother said reluctantly. “I’ll be over first
thing in the morning to pick you up, all right? And I saw some
food in the cupboards, so if you’re hungry you can make
yourself something.”
“OK. I’ll see you tomorrow then.”
“Call us if you need anything or if you just want some
company.”
“I will. Night Mum.”
40
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 40
“I love you.”
“I know.”
Stephanie hung up and grinned. She slipped the phone back
into her jacket and put her feet up on the desk, relaxing back
into the chair, and went back to reading.
When she looked up again she was surprised to find that it
was almost midnight and the rain had stopped. If she were
home right now, she’d be in bed. She blinked, her eyes sore,
stood up from the desk and went downstairs to the kitchen. For
all his wealth and success and extravagant tastes, she was
thankful that when it came to food, Gordon was a pretty
standard guy. The bread was stale and the fruit was a bit too
ripe, but there were biscuits and there was cereal, and the milk
in the fridge was still good for one more day. Stephanie made
herself a snack and wandered to the living room, where she
flicked on the TV. She sat on the couch and was just getting
comfy when the house phone rang.
She looked at it, resting there on the table at her elbow. Who
would be calling? Anyone who knew Gordon had died wouldn’t
be calling because they’d know he had died, and she didn’t really
want to be the one to tell anyone who didn’t know. It could be
her parents, but then why didn’t they just call her mobile?
Figuring that as the new owner of the house, it was her
41
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 41
responsibility to answer her own phone, Stephanie picked it up
and held it to her ear. “Hello?”
Silence.
“Hello?” Stephanie repeated.
“Who is this?” came a man’s voice.
“I’m sorry,” Stephanie said, “who do you want to speak to?”
“Who is this?” responded the voice, more irritably this time.
“If you’re looking for Gordon Edgley,” Stephanie said, “I’m
afraid that he’s—”
“I know Edgley’s dead,” snapped the man. “Who are you?
Your name?”
Stephanie hesitated. “Why do you want to know?” she
asked.
“What are you doing in that house? Why are you in his
house?”
“If you want to call back tomorrow—”
“I don’t want to, all right? Listen to me, girlie, if you mess
up my master’s plans, he will be very displeased and he is not
a man you want to displease, you got that? Now tell me who
you are!”
Stephanie realised her hands were shaking. She forced
herself to calm down and quickly found anger replacing her
nervousness. “My name is none of your business,” she said. “If
42
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 42
you want to talk to someone, call back tomorrow at a reasonable
hour.”
“You don’t talk to me like that,” the man hissed.
“Goodnight,” Stephanie said firmly.
“You do not talk to me like—”
But Stephanie was already putting the phone down.
Suddenly the idea of spending the whole night here wasn’t as
appealing as it had first sounded. She considered calling her
parents, then scolded herself for being so childish. No need to
worry them, she thought to herself. No need to worry them about
something so—
Someone pounded on the front door.
“Open up!” came the man’s voice between the pounding.
Stephanie got to her feet, staring through to the hall beyond the
living room. She could see a dark shape behind the frosted glass
around the front door. “Open the damn door!”
Stephanie backed up to the fireplace, her heart pounding in
her chest. He knew she was in here, there was no use pretending
that she wasn’t, but maybe if she stayed really quiet he’d give up
and go away. She heard him cursing, and the pounding grew so
heavy that the front door rattled under the blows.
“Leave me alone!” Stephanie shouted.
“Open the door!”
43
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 43
“No!” she shouted back. She liked shouting – it disguised her
fear. “I’m calling the police! I’m calling the police right now!”
The pounding stopped immediately and Stephanie saw the
shape move away from the door. Was that it? Had she scared
him away? She thought of the back door – was it locked? Of
course it was locked… It had to be locked. But she wasn’t sure,
she wasn’t certain. She grabbed a poker from the fireplace and
was reaching for the phone when she heard a knock on the
window beside her.
She cried out and jumped back. The curtains were open,
and outside the window was pitch-black. She couldn’t see a
thing.
“Are you alone in there?” came the voice. It was teasing now,
playing with her.
“Go away,” she said loudly, holding up the poker so he could
see it. She heard the man laugh.
“What are you going to do with that?” he asked.
“I’ll break your head open with it!” Stephanie screamed at
him, fear and fury bubbling inside her. She heard him laugh
again.
“I just want to come in,” he said. “Open the door for me,
girlie. Let me come in.”
“The police are on their way,” she said.
44
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 44
“You’re a liar.”
Still she could see nothing beyond the glass and he could see
everything. She moved to the phone, snatching it from its cradle.
“Don’t do that,” came the voice.
“I’m calling the police.”
“The road’s closed, girlie. You call them, I’ll break down that
door and kill you hours before they get here.”
Fear became terror and Stephanie froze. She was going to
cry. She could feel it, the tears welling up inside her. She hadn’t
cried in years. “What do you want?” she said to the darkness.
“Why do you want to come in?”
“It’s got nothing to do with me, girlie. I’ve just been sent to
pick something up. Let me in. I’ll look around, get what I came
here for and leave. I won’t harm a pretty little hair on your pretty
little head, I promise. Now you just open that door right this
second.”
Stephanie gripped the poker in both hands and shook her
head. She was crying now, tears rolling down her cheeks. “No,”
she said.
She screamed as a fist smashed through the window,
showering the carpet with glass. She stumbled back as the man
started climbing in, glaring at her with blazing eyes, unmindful
of the glass that cut into him. The moment one foot touched the
45
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 45
floor inside the house Stephanie was bolting out of the room,
over to the front door, fumbling at the lock.
Strong hands grabbed her from behind. She screamed again
as she was lifted off her feet and carried back. She kicked out,
slamming a heel into his shin. The man grunted and let go and
Stephanie twisted, trying to swing the poker into his face but he
caught it and pulled it from her grasp. One hand went to her
throat and Stephanie gagged, unable to breathe as the man
forced her back into the living room.
He pushed her into an armchair and leaned over her and no
matter how hard she tried she could not break his grip.
“Now then,” the man said, his mouth contorting into a
sneer, “why don’t you just give me the key, little girlie?”
And that’s when the front door was flung off its hinges and
Skulduggery Pleasant burst into the house.
The man cursed and released Stephanie and swung the
poker, but Skulduggery moved straight to him and hit him so
hard Stephanie thought the man’s head might come off. He hit
the ground and tumbled backwards, but rolled to his feet as
Skulduggery moved in again.
The man launched himself forward. They both collided and
went backwards over the couch and Skulduggery lost his hat.
Stephanie saw a flash of white above the scarf.
46
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 46
They got to their feet, grappling, and the man swung a
punch that knocked Skulduggery’s sunglasses to the other side of
the room. Skulduggery responded by moving in low, grabbing
the man around the waist and twisting his hip into him. The
man was flipped to the floor, hard.
He cursed a little more, then remembered Stephanie and
made for her. Stephanie leaped out of the chair, but before he
could reach her, Skulduggery was there, kicking the man’s legs
out from under him. The man hit a small coffee table with his
chin and howled in pain.
“You think you can stop me?” he screamed as he tried to stand.
His knees seemed shaky. “Do you know who I am?”
“Haven’t the foggiest,” Skulduggery said.
The man spat blood and grinned defiantly. “Well, I know
about you,” he said. “My master told me all about you, detective,
and you’re going to have to do a lot more than that to stop me.”
Skulduggery shrugged and Stephanie watched in
amazement as a ball of fire flared up in his hand and he hurled
it and the man was suddenly covered in flame. But instead of
screaming, the man tilted his head back and roared with
laughter. The fire may have engulfed him, but it wasn’t burning
him.
“More!” he laughed. “Give me more!”
47
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 47
“If you insist.”
And then Skulduggery took an old-fashioned revolver from
his jacket and fired, the gun bucking slightly with the recoil. The
bullet hit the man in the shoulder and he screamed, then tried
to run and tripped. He scrambled for the doorway, ducking and
dodging lest he get shot again, the flames obstructing his vision
so much that he hit a wall on his way out.
And then he was gone.
Stephanie stared at the door, trying to make sense of the
impossible.
“Well,” Skulduggery said, “that’s something you don’t see
every day.”
She turned. When his hat came off, his hair had come off
too. In the confusion all she had seen was a chalk-white scalp, so
she turned expecting to see a bald albino maybe. But no. With
his sunglasses gone and his scarf hanging down, there was no
denying the fact that he had no flesh, he had no skin, he had no
eyes and he had no face.
All he had was a skull for a head.
12796_SKULDUGGERY_B_Format:Layout 1 28/6/07 10:15 Page 48